---
layout: post
title: Template Definition in Header File
date: 2023-12-08 11:05:16 -0700
category: C++
author: 🍓
---

### what happens during compilation and linking

The building process in C++ is typically divided into two main phases:

- **Compilation Phase**: Each source file (`.cpp`) is compiled independently
  into an object file (`.o`). For regular (non-template) functions, it's
  sufficient to have just the declaration (i.e., the function's signature)
  available during compilation, as the actual function definition can be linked
  in later.
- **Linking Phase**: All the object files are linked together to create the
  final executable. The linker resolves references to function definitions that
  were not available during the compilation phase.

Linking happens after compilation, meaning the compiler won’t have all the
information of the templates during compilation, and this introduces the need to
include the template definition in the header as we will discuss in the
following section.

### templates are instantiated at compile time

C++ templates are a compile-time construct, which means that the compiler
generates code for a template function or class at the time it is instantiated
with a specific type. This leads to the fact that the compiler must generate
specific code for each instantiation with different types, and it requires
complete knowledge of the template's implementation, as different types might
lead to different code paths or operations within the template.

Therefore, in order for instantiation of the templates, the compiler needs
access to the full definition of the template, not just its declaration. Without
the full definition, the compiler cannot generate this specific code.

### regular functions (classes) and templates

For regular functions or classes, the definition can be separate from the
declaration because the compiler doesn't need to generate specific code for each
use at compile time. It just needs the function signature for type checking and
to generate call to the function.

For templates, having only the declaration of a template in the header file
means the compiler would not have enough information to instantiate the template
in source files. It needs the full definition of the function or class. The
reasons involve:

- The behavior of a template can significantly base on the types with which it’s
  instantiated. The compiler needs these to generate the correct code.
- Templates frequently use type traits and compile-time checks to make decisions
  based on the types they're instantiated with, which can affect stuff like the
  code path and which overloads are called.
- Templates are often used in contexts where inlining and other optimizations
  are important, and such optimizations can be performed efficiently only if the
  compiler has access to the full definition of the template.

### conclusion

Thus, in conclusion, the definition of a template should go in the header file
with its declaration. This is because:

- The compiler has to instantiate the template each time it is called.
- And to do that, it will need all the information on the template which only
  happens in its definition.
- But linking happens after compilation, so if the declaration (in header) and
  definition are separated, there’s no way for the compiler to find that
  definition of the function or class that’s being instantiated.

### example

Here’s an example of returning the larger of two numbers:

- template

```cpp
// compare.h
template <typename T, typename U>
auto compare(const T& a, const U& b) {
    return (a > b) ? a : b;
}

// Tolerance for floating-point comparison
const float FLOAT_CMP_TOLERANCE = 0.00001f;

template <>
float compare<float, float>(const float& a, const float& b) {
    if (std::fabs(a - b) < FLOAT_CMP_TOLERANCE) {
        return a; // Consider them equal and return either
    }
    return (a > b) ? a : b;
}

template <>
double compare<double, double>(const double& a, const double& b) {
    if (std::fabs(a - b) < FLOAT_CMP_TOLERANCE) {
        return a;
    }
    return (a > b) ? a : b;
}

// main.cpp
#include "compare_template.h"

int main() {
    int num1 = 5;
    double num2 = 3.2;
    auto result = compare(num1, num2);
    std::cout << "Larger number is: " << result << std::endl;
    return 0;
}
```

- regular

```cpp
// compare.h
int compareInts(int a, int b);

// compare.cpp
int compareInts(int a, int b) {
    return (a > b) ? a : b;
}

// main.cpp
#include "compare_regular.h"

int main() {
    int num1 = 5;
    int num2 = 3;
    int result = compareInts(num1, num2);
    std::cout << "Larger number is: " << result << std::endl;
    return 0;
}
```