---
layout: post
title: "Working with Syzbot Bugs"
date: 2023-08-21 10:37:03 -0700
---

Overview
--------

When working on bugs reported by Syzbot, it is important to utilize the provided
resources -- such as the C/syz reproducers and various images -- to our maximum
advantage. In this article, I'm going to share my personal setups when I try to
investigate a Syzbot bug. While these are by no means the standard procedure to
follow, I hope they would offer some help to some new developers who wants to
get a head start in dealing with Syzbot bugs.


Preparations
------------

# Cloning the Linux Kernel

The first step would be obtaining a fresh copy of the kernel code. I recommend
checking out
[this guide](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/process/submitting-patches.html)
for some general information, but the bare minimum command is:

```shell
$ git clone git://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git linux_mainline
```

Notice the directory is named `linux_mainline`, and the rest of this guide would
follow the same assumption. Now, head inside the directory and make sure we are
staying on a stable RC version, e.g. `Linux 6.5-rc4`, since we would be
reproducing any bugs from that commit.

# Preparing QEMU VM

We would be using a QEMU-based VM to run the kernel we'd like to test, so first
install any dependencies of QEMU, and make a new directory for the disk images
of the VM we are about to start:

```shell
$ sudo apt install qemu
$ mkdir disk_image
```

# The VM boot script

QEMU commands can be quite complicated. Below is my version of the QEMU startup
script, which I've named as `qemu_syzbot.sh`:

```shell
#!/bin/bash

qemu-system-x86_64 -smp 16 -m 16G -enable-kvm -cpu host \
    -net nic -net user,hostfwd=tcp::10022-:22 \
    -kernel linux_mainline/arch/x86/boot/bzImage -nographic \
    -device virtio-scsi-pci,id=scsi \
    -device scsi-hd,bus=scsi.0,drive=d0 \
    -drive file=disk_image/disk.raw,format=raw,if=none,id=d0 \
    -append "root=/dev/sda1 console=ttyS0 earlyprintk=serial" | tee vm.log
```

Some of the logic inside this script may seem confusing at first, so let's walk
through some of the important points to notice here:

* Under the current configuration, the VM is going to use the host's CPU up to
  16 cores (`-smp 16`), and RAM up to 16GB (`-m 16G`), so please adjust the
  configuration based on your machine's specs
* Users would be able to establish SSH connection to the VM through port 10022,
  in addition to accessing the serial console offered by QEMU itself (when this
  script is run)
* The kernel image is named `linux_mainline/arch/x86/boot/bzImage`, and will be
  available once we finish compiling the kernel
* The disk image is named `disk_image/disk.raw`, which we would download from
  Syzbot and extract into the raw disk file format
* Any output to the serial console would be streamed into `vm.log`, which we
  could examine after terminating the VM; this way any useful messages would not
  get lost


The debugging process
---------------------

# Downloading necessary files

On a Syzbot bug page such as
[this one](https://syzkaller.appspot.com/bug?extid=881d65229ca4f9ae8c84), we
could usually pick the most recent bug entry with a reproducer, and try to
replicate the bug behavior on our Linux mainline code. I'll show an example of
using a C reproducer; to use syz reproducers instead, please checkout
[this guide](https://github.com/google/syzkaller/blob/master/docs/executing_syzkaller_programs.md).

The documents needed would be the kernel config, disk image, and C reproducer
code. Notice we are skipping the kernel image and `vmlinux`, since they would be
compiled by ourselves instead. Run the following commands, while substituting
the corresponding links for the bug you are working on:

```shell
$ wget "<.config link>" -O linux_mainline/.config
$ wget "<disk image link>" -O disk_image/disk.raw.xz
$ wget "<C reproducer link>" -O repro.c
$ pushd disk_image && xz -d -v disk.raw.xz && popd
```

# Compiling the kernel

We would apply the standard procedure of compiling the kernel after a config
change. Notice we have not changed anything in the kernel code in order for the
bug to surface. After making any code changes to attempt a bug fix, the
procedure to compile would be the same:

```shell
$ make listnewconfig
$ make oldconfig
$ make -j $(nproc)
```

# Copying reproducer into VM

The disk image provided by Syzbot, while could accurately reflect the bug
situation, is unfortunately not very comprehensive. Basic tools such as `gcc`
and any event tracing tools are missing, and although we could maintain an
Internet connection through QEMU's capabilities, there are no package managers
for us to install additional software either. Therefore, we need to compile the
reproducer program from our host, then copy the static binary into the VM in
order to run it:

```shell
$ gcc repro.c -o repro -lpthread -static
(start the VM) $ sudo ./qemu_syzbot.sh
(in another window) $ scp -P 10022 -o "StrictHostKeyChecking no" -o "IdentitiesOnly yes" ./repro root@localhost:~
```

The boot process of a VM can take around 10-30 seconds, so please wait until the
login prompt is available before using SCP to copy the reproducer binary. Note
that the root user of this VM is configured without a password, so any SCP calls
should not require further user input.

# Copying `strace` into VM (optional)

Some Syzbot bugs offer "`strace` logs", which utilize the `strace` tool to track
any syscalls made by the reproducer. Surprisingly (or not), the disk image
mentioned above does not provide `strace` within itself. In order to replicate
the same behavior of syscall tracing, we could follow
[this guide](https://github.com/google/syzkaller/blob/master/docs/strace.md) to
compile a static binary of `strace`, then use a very similar command to SCP the
binary into our VM:

```shell
$ scp -P 10022 -o "StrictHostKeyChecking no" -o "IdentitiesOnly yes" ./strace/src/strace root@localhost:/usr/bin
```

Notice the `strace` binary has been copied to the `/usr/bin` directory, in order
to allow directly using the command inside the VM, as if it was pre-installed.

# Running the reproducer

The following commands can now be used to SSH into the VM, and run the
reproducer with or without tracing syscalls:

```shell
$ ssh -p 10022 -o "StrictHostKeyChecking no" -o "IdentitiesOnly yes" root@localhost
(run directly) $ ./repro
(run with strace) $ strace -e \!wait4,clock_nanosleep,nanosleep -s 100 -x -f ./repro
```

The `strace` flags are kept consistent with what Syzbot offers, which specify
which syscalls to skip recording, along with some other quality-of-life settings
to improve output readability.

The reproducer may cause the kernel to crash, and the SSH session may become
unresponsive. To regain control, head back to the QEMU console (in another
window), and hit `ctrl-a` followed by a single key `x`. This would terminate the
QEMU process immediately and kill the VM. Remember we have all messages streamed
to `vm.log`, so don't worry -- no results or data have been lost. The hanging
SSH process would then terminate momentarily, giving control back to you for any
next steps.

# Testing your patch

Hopefully the above steps have led you to successfully triggering the bug, and
hopefully, after some reasonable number of rinse-and-repeats, you have found a
patch to fix the reported issue. Syzbot provides a feature that allows you to
submit a patch test request, so that it could automatically apply your patch and
test if the bug has indeed been fixed according to its own criteria. To inform
Syzbot such a request, first include this command anywhere in the body text of
your patch (often obtained by `git format-patch`):

```
#syz test:
https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git master
```

The above command tells Syzbot to apply the patch (parsed from your email body)
on top of the current master branch of Linux mainline. Note that, for a
particular type of bugs whose titles start with "KMSAN", another designated
repository should be used instead of mainline:

```
#syz test:
https://github.com/google/kmsan.git master master
```

The next step would be to reply an email to Syzbot with the patch and the above
message. You could click the conversation sent by Syzbot in order to find a
reply link, which would take you to a suggested `git send-email` command.
However, usually we should **not** take the command as-is, since we probably do
not want to inform all other developers tagged in the patch when we simply want
to test our patch. Therefore, we should trim down the command to look like the
following (for example):

```shell
$ git send-email \
    --in-reply-to=00000000000051197705fdbc7e54@google.com \
    --to=syzbot+881d65229ca4f9ae8c84@syzkaller.appspotmail.com \
    --cc=syzkaller-bugs@googlegroups.com \
    /path/to/your/patch
```

After running the command, confirming to send the email, and refreshing the bug
report page several seconds later, you would be able to see a new "Last patch
testing requests" section with your patch being listed. A round of Syzbot CI
usually takes around 30 minutes, so check back later to find your patch test
results. If it says "OK" with a log link -- congratulations, you've successfully
fixed a kernel bug!

# Submitting your patch

The final step would be to submit your patch for review. This is also done
through a `git send-email` command based on what's offered by Syzbot. This time,
though, instead of trimming down the kernel developers in the CC list, we should
promote all the "maintainers" related to your patch from the CC list (`--cc`) to
the direct recipient list (`--to`). To obtain which emails we need to promote,
we should run the `get_maintainer.pl` script on the patch to be submitted:

```shell
$ linux_mainline/scripts/get_maintainer.pl /path/to/your/patch
```

Any emails in that list should have a `--to` entry, no matter whether it's been
changed from a `--cc` entry, or it's a new entry being appended. This step
ensures any potential reviewer would see your patch and know it's ready for
review. To ensure enough clarity, please also make sure to remove the
`#syz test` command you might have included in the earlier step.

And... that's it! After sending the email, your journey of fixing a Syzbot bug
is now **nearly** complete. The reason I said "nearly" is -- obviously, you
should be continuously responsible for maintaining email communication with the
patch reviewers, and iterating on the review comments to polish your patch. Now
it should be a walk in the park, though -- you already know all the technical
details as we've just covered!


Final remarks
-------------

I've kept the above sections as generic as possible and intentionally left out
any details relevant to a specific bug, so hopefully these tips could be applied
to any Syzbot bug you plan to work on! And certainly -- there will also be quite
a few bugs which cannot be reliably reproduced, so if your reproduction steps do
not succeed on the first try, give it a couple more chances. Maybe your
reproduction effort is all rigorous, and it's the bug itself that exhibits the
flakiness you've encountered. Don't be afraid to fail, try as many ways as you
could, and enjoy the bittersweet problem-solving process!

I also recommend reading the
[official Syzbot documentation](https://github.com/google/syzkaller/tree/master/docs)
for any further tips that might help you. Cheers!
